I'm the curator for the acquisitions and cataloging at the Herzog August Bibliothek at Walschenbüttel Duke August Library at Walschenbüttel and I'm also since about 20 years the secretary for the library history group at Walschenbüttel and it's my task to prepare the meeting
the conferences of this working group, which is working internationally.
We make our meetings together with the library history group of Great Britain and London, or with other groups, or with other institutions, and therefore I have to do a lot with old printed books as well.
You're exactly the kind of person I should be talking to.
When you talk about library history, are you talking about just in terms of the history of libraries
as institutions?
Maybe you could tell me a little bit about how you define library history and how you approach it.
Yes, I think library history is no longer the history of the single institutions.
This is a very old form, perhaps an anachronistic form of library history.
Library history is a very interdisciplinary method
has to deal with the history of knowledge, I think, especially the history of knowledge, the history of humanism, the history of science.
I think it's a focus.
It's a focus of most of our business disciplines dealing with humanist conditions and so on.
And I think, too, the library history doesn't see
this aim for its own dealing.
In some years it will no longer be of any interest.
Do you think so?
I don't think so.
It's no longer the history of the single institutions.
I think it's perhaps too old a theme for dealing with.
Why do you think it will no longer?
What are the forces that are causing that to happen, do you think?
Is it electronic?
I mean, is it the movement away from books?
No, I think it's also dealing with the databases and so on.
But I think library history, only dealing with the library and that, this no longer seems interesting, a lot of people.
Therefore, I think this discipline must
together with other disciplines, like history, like philosophy, history of knowledge, as I said.
Now you have people like Robert Darnton and Anne Chatier, they study the history of the book.
Is this similar to the history of libraries?
Are we talking about the same thing, or are we talking about different things here?
In Germany, always the history of books,
and history of the libraries were different things.
But in France, Chartier, or in the US, Robert Danton, both disciplines were always turned together as one thing.
And Robert Danton, Roger Chartier, and the others, I think they are dealing with the history of reading, history of learning.
And this is what I think must also deal with.
I'm interviewing Darton next month at Frankston, and I've already done a nice wonderful interview with Tony Grafton as well, and Father Boyle I interviewed at the Vatican Library.
People with different takes.
I'm really interested, but you distinguish between the library and the book, right?
The library is an institution, I gather, in your view.
The library is an institution, and in Germany there are very different minds about libraries.
A lot of the university libraries are in no way dealing with their own history.
They're only dealing, they're only interested in the work of the day.
They're not looking back and so on.
We have no time for looking back and no chance.
The libraries with stockings of old printed books, they are dealing also with history.
There's not a lot of libraries in Germany, only I think perhaps ten, which have a great lot of old printed books, and who are dealing with themes like book history and library history.
This is the libraries at Walsham-Buttel, at Göttingen, at Leimann,
and other ones, but it's not worth a great deal.
And of course, your library is quite an extraordinary library in that it began as a private collection, isn't that right?
It began as a collection of the Dukes of Franzi Wolfenbüttel.
And the name of Duke August is the name of the greatest collector, but August was not the first founder.
He was one of his predecessors in the
second half of the sixteenth century.
August was a re-founder in the midst of the first half of the seventeenth century, but his library is the focus of our work.
It was a very, very great collection in the seventeenth century.
When August died in 1666 he had collected perhaps one hundred thirty-five thousand
That's an amazing number for that period of time.
I can't think of any other comparable collections at that point.
His library was, at this time, one of the greatest collections of northern Europe, I think.
And he had built up this library not as a private library.
It was a political institution for his country.
That's how he conceived it?
Oh, yes.
He called his library as an immeasurable treasure for the whole country, which mustn't have gone over, which must take forever.
And I think he knew that this was not a private thing, also because he had spent a lot of money for this.
Was he a bibliomaniac?
I mean, was he a bibliophile?
Yes, I think he was too bibliophile, but at first rate he collected the books of his time.
His time was the time of the Great War, the so-called Thirty-Year War, which has compended his whole life.
And I think more than half of
These 135,000 titles are titles from the 17th century.
So they were largely printed books, obviously.
Yes, printed books.
The main discipline of the library was theology.
It's not amazing.
Theology was, still in the 17th century, the leading discipline of the thinking and so on.
Theology, history,
deuce, and philosophy, and so on.
These are the main disciplines of Islamery.
But I'd say once again, the 17th century is on time.
This is the leading period.
And he collected, and that is because he was also a bibliophile.
He collected, naturally, the manuscripts of the early and the high medieval times.
And he collected the manuscripts about all Europe, not only from
and so on in Germany, what he collected, especially in France, Italy, yes, France, Italy, and Germany, I think, the main countries.
He got his very, very wonderful manuscripts.
And did he separate the manuscripts from the printed books?
Yes.
He did.
He had the systematization, the classification, 20 groups, and one of these 20 groups was the manuscripts, the Augusteer,
One of the things that amazed me up on Mount Athos in Greece was that they bought a lot of printed books, too, as they were issued.
Incunubals, in fact.
But they would mix them up with the manuscripts.
They would even sometimes put them in the same binding.
They really didn't distinguish between, you know, what was a unique work, a work in manuscript and a printed book.
It was mainly the information.
Now, was he collecting for rarity or was he collecting really for knowledge, do you think, in your view?
I think he was especially collected for knowledge.
He was very interested in theology.
He studied jurisprudence, like all princes in Europe.
But he was very interested in theology, in history.
He has written by himself a book about chess-playing, chess-spiel, a very wonderful book.
You can see it on the exhibition.
And he discussed with the professors of his university at Helmstedt, a small town, I think 30 kilometer eastern of Wolfenbüttel, that was the university of the duchy of Brunswick, Lüneburg, and so on.
And this university played a great part in the discussion of Aristotelism in the 17th century.
And he took part in this discussion at a very high level.
Was he a scholar in his own right?
Yes, he was a very, very highly educated scholar.
He couldn't only write and speak Latin, he also could read and translate Greek.
That's amazing.
This was not the usual thing.
And do you think it was always in the forefront of his mind that this was something he was building for Germany, not for himself?
It's the most important part for his country, you must see.
Not Germany, I would say, Germany... His country, whatever.
...a lot of small, small... Like Italy in some respects.
...countries, but it was a political institution for his country.
It was Dutchie, Brunswick, Los Angeles, part of the greater Dutchie of Brunswick, UNIROG.
Do you think that this was a library in a political sense, the way the Ambrosiana is in Milan?
It was a library for supporting
his own ideas about theology, about history and so on.
He was a very peaceful prince.
I said that the great war, the 30th year war, was a part of his life and he has always tried to make peace with all other parts to make his own country rebuild, which was very hard destroyed by the
parties of this war.
And he also tried to bring peace to the different parties of the confessions between the Lutherans, Orthodox, and the other people who were somewhat liberals and so on.
And a great, great lot of authors in his library.
I think that these books
his board for bringing arguments for his ideas and his confessions.
Were scholars always welcome?
Oh yes.
Even while he was alive?
The Duke lent his books to other scholars, and I think the Volcker Library was also a center of discussion for scholars.
Scholars came not only from his own country,
They came also from other countries in Germany or other great and important towns from southern Germany, like Nuremberg, Augsburg and so on.
Not only scholars, but also poets.
Poets were ever welcome.
Would you say that his material largely supported a point of view?
Yes.
I think he supported a point of view.
His point of view
But also, you can also find naturally the books for the other side of the coin.
But he collected them?
Yes, he has collected them.
Mindfully.
Oh yes, he collected them.
I think no book has come to his library without, that the Duke has said, okay.
He also, every, each book was in his library, I think he has seen, he has told it in himself.
Really?
He paid the invoice, I think so.
Yeah, really.
And was he also in charge of the acquisitions, or did he have staff who did that?
Yes, he was in charge of the acquisitions.
So he signed off on everything?
There's a huge catalog of six volumes, and three of the six volumes he has written by his own hand.
The titles are written there.
Would you say he basically committed his life, dedicated his life to this project, or did he have other interests?
I think he was a very, very busy man.
From 6 a.m.
till perhaps 6 p.m., he worked for his country.
He ruled.
He worked for his library.
Did he give the library to his country before he died?
No, no, no.
He made his last will, and in this last will you can read the sentences about what I said, the great unmetall of his library, which means the library is for his country.
and that this institution has to remain forever.
And he doesn't say what his sons had to do with the library.
And he didn't say you must buy books in the same way like I do, like I did.
But he has written down that no one could say this library has to be
put to another town, or we can sell the library.
But he has said the library has to be here.
It wasn't better forever.
But under the auspices of the government, or just as like the Morgan Library is, you know, I mean, obviously Morgan left money to take care of it.
Did he turn it over to the government?
No, no, no.
The financial situation was during his life very, very good.
But after his death,
The sons had other interests.
They were collecting pictures of their times, of the 17th and then later on in the 18th century.
There was no fixed fund for his library.
At this time he spent a lot of money, but his sons, I think, hadn't great interest.
But the library was opened for the public after his death for our public.
For all people who were interested to read, they could come and learn the books for one week.
Really?
So they would actually allow the books to go out to circulate?
Yes.
Would you say, did he have any unique items or scarce items?
Is this a library that is replicated elsewhere?
describe the role, the function of this library.
Does it fill any kind of a niche that is not available elsewhere?
No.
The people of August's times has also seen the great importance of the library.
And there was a special... The devise about this, I think that told it the
Eighth wonder of the world, achtes Weltwonder, for this library because of this.
Really?
Yes.
Who called it this?
Yes, it was Georg Philipp Haster, a German poet of Nordenberg, and other ones too.
I think all people who had seen the books and had the possibility to work there,
were very impressed and they knew that this is not to repeat at another town or another place and so on.
If you were to compare this with anything, would you compare it, say, with the Morgan and the Huntington?
It is an independent research library?
It's today a research library.
It's not independent because the library of the
state of La Saxony, one of the states of Germany.
But it's not the role to support an institution like a university or so on.
It's there for scholars.
OK.
It's only for scholars and for all people who would like to come there and read until we're 15 years old.
And do you get a lot of independent readers, people come in?
That's okay.
We have a lot of fellows.
We have fellows from, I think, nearly all over the world.
A lot of fellows come from the U.S.
and therefore we founded, some years ago, also the Society of the American Friends of the library.
We have since, I think, 25 years.
Society of the Friends of the After Congress Library in Germany.
And some years ago, the former fellows, having been for some time in Washington, have found it here.
There must be a wonderful biography of him.
Is there a good biography of him?
I think it is necessary to write a new biography of Duke August.
It's not so easy because he has a very long life and he has written a lot of material and he has read a lot of letters and so on.
They are very interesting.
But I think it will cost a lot of time and some years to write this biography.
You need a good scholar to do this.
I think a good scholar and he must be
He must be willing to spend, I think, perhaps 10 years of his life to deal with this.
There's a new biography of J.P.
Morgan coming out shortly by Jean Strauss, and she's been working on it for about 15 years, as I understand.
In our archives, and in the other archives of Laura Saxony, a lot of letters, the letters between Duke August,
and his agents.
Agents, they were people collecting and buying and selling books and pictures and furniture and so on.
And with some of these agents in towns of Germany, in Augsburg and Nordenburg, he has built up his library.
Did he have a want list?
Did he send out lists of things that he wanted?
Or was he basically buying contemporary things as they were issued?
Yes.
These agents.
Perhaps there was one very famous man, Philip Heinhofer at Augsburg.
H-A-I-N-H-O-F-E-R.
Heinhofer.
Philip Heinhofer.
He's a very famous man who dealt with, I think, most of the courts in Europe and who sold books for them, books, pictures, furniture,
clocks, and so on, and he had very, very good, very good senses for finding, for finding manuscripts, for finding books, which Duke August would like to have.
He was a very, very, very important man for him, and I think each week, every week, a long guitar from Wolfram Wottel, from Duke,
went to Philip Hainhofer in Augsburg, and also a week, a long letter came from Philip Hainhofer, the August, dealing with books, with the wishes of the Duke for having books and the answers of Mr. Hainhofer, telling which would be possible, this book or this book not, at the price, at the price, it was very, very important.
Duke August was not a rich man.
And he was dealing about the price.
He was not a rich man?
No, no, not a rich man.
He was not a rich man, and for it, therefore, he dealt about the price of every book in a very hard form.
He was not a rich man.
And his country was destroyed by the war, and he had to build up this country.
And he said the library is an instrument.
The library is an instrument, yet I think his third wife had some of the money, and I think his wife gave him some money for building up the library.
When did the state assume control of the library?
Right after his death?
When did the state take control of the library?
Really after the First World War.
Really?
Yes.
In 1919, the last Duke of Branding Wolfmittl was depossessed.
He lost his reign, and he got some money, and then he should go away.
And then there was, I think, a combination between the
the court, the court of the dukes and the government of the country of Brunswick, which was there.
This institution remained till after the Second World War.
But I think it was not before 1955, 1955, that the state of Lower Saxony
took this library as an institution of the state.
And are you constantly, is it a constantly growing library?
I mean, you said he had 135,000 titles.
What's the size of it now?
Oh, yes, but also, this is only one of our stocks of alternate books.
Also, the books of the former university library at Helps that I told about the university,
And we have also, I think, about 10 smaller private libraries of other dukes of Brunswick, Wolfenbottor.
The library is now about the size of 800,000 books, and of these are perhaps 450,000 books before 1850.
450,000 books before 1850, altogether a time
about 800,000 printed books, 12,000 manuscripts, and of these 12,000 manuscripts, they are 3,500 medieval manuscripts.
I think there's a lot of medieval manuscripts.
We have also some special collections like prints, like portrait prints, and so on.
And we are also collecting the books, the books of the art of the 20th century, the livres de peintre, artists' books, and books of the hand presses.
as they say in the university world, a dedicated budget for the purchase of material every year?
I mean, do you have a regular budget?
Yes, we have a regular budget as a state library.
The budget is altogether for one and a half million.
One and a half million German marks.
The library is, since some years, also the special libraries for books of the 17th century.
17th?
17th century.
You know perhaps that Germany has no national library before 1912.
Not before founding the Deutsche Bücherei.
There is no national library.
Ten years ago, they were made
for building up the Displace National Library for the former centuries.
There are five libraries dealing with this theme.
This is the Bavarian State Library for the incredible time of the 16th century.
This is the Hanzig August Library for the 17th century.
This is the University Library of Göttingen for the 18th century.
And the 19th, the 20th century, there are two libraries dealing with it.
There's the University and State Library at Frankfurt on Main, and the State Library in Berlin.
And where do you fit in?
Where does your library fit in?
Our library is for the 17th century.
And basically it's a national library.
Yes, okay.
For the 17th century, yes.
I think the Walkman Library has about 150,000 printed books of the 17th century.
And now we can buy perhaps 400,000 German marks a year, books of the 17th century from the antiquarian market.
Or is it possible to get the original books by second forms, like microfiche or microcups, or CD's, CD-ROMs?
I was fascinated when I was in Leipzig that the YouTube book where I was 1912 and that it was established by the publishers.
It was really established as a depository for their own books.
You know, it's almost unique when you think of national libraries.
Also, the successor institution, the Deutsche Bibliothek at Frankfurt am Main, was also founded as part by the publishers.
And the other part were the town of Frankfurt am Main and the country of Hesha.
And when I was there, they took me into the boardroom, and they have portraits of all the publishers on the wall, which is quite interesting.
You don't really see that.
Yes, I think the publishers would like
at the beginning of the century that there must be an institution for collecting all books printed in Germany or printed about Germany and so on.
Germany is very interesting as a national library today because you had the West Germany, the East Germany, you had the National Socialists.
So I asked Dr. Lehmann
how do you distinguish between, I mean, do politics enter into it?
And he said, what we do is we collect everything in the German language, and that transcends political lines or about Germany.
I mean, because it is an interesting consideration.
With reunification, how do you decide what to collect and what not to collect?
And he said, very simple.
If it's in German, we collect it.
It's okay.
But it was so that also during the times of the
German Democratic Republic, the publishers of the Federal Republic of Germany, West Germany, sent one issue of the books to Leipzig.
And did they send some... I remember I talked to you about Kurt Nowak at Frankfurt, and he was saying, even during the years of the two Germanys, we used to send each other books, you know, kind of this kind of misunderstanding that you would send each other books.
And so now you do have these two institutions.
And I'm very interested in the fact that they are trying to preserve everything.
It doesn't matter what the book is.
I mean, it can be a basically worthless old city directory.
You know, they're going through this leaf casting and... I went through the whole place while they were doing this.
I'm fascinated by this.
You know, so many places will dump this stuff.
You know, let me get rid of it.
Out in San Francisco, I'm writing about the San Francisco Public Library.
They built a new library and they set 200,000 books off to the landfill, quietly, to the dump, you know, to get rid of them.
Yes, but I think you have also here at libraries who are collecting not only books, but also other special things.
Your public library is collecting, I think, great special collections, great post-top and so on.
Local history in particular is very interesting.
The New York Public Library is one of the great libraries in the world, and the Boston Public Library is also quite a wonderful day.
But a lot of public libraries are more or less advocating this responsibility as research libraries.
I would say that Mr. Lehmann has done a very good job in unification.
He has.
These two libraries was not an easy task.
But I think this was without any difficulties getting out.
The other way is unification of the two libraries in Berlin.
They are only struggling.
But now Mr. Lehmann will go as the president of the foundation to Berlin in February and then I think he will also... I'm sorry, I missed that.
What is happening with the... Klaus Lehmann is the future president of the foundation that is a very, very huge institution for culture in Germany.
So he's leaving his country... He's leaving Frankfurt and he's going to Berlin at the beginning of the next year.
And then I think he would at first unificate these two libraries, these two state libraries in West and in East Berlin.
So he's kind of a work of magic in Berlin now, too, I guess.
I think so, yes.
I don't know if you have seen this.
This was a very political thing in Germany before the elections in September.
The government of the Federal Republic,
The chancellor, Mr. Coro, had a known attendant for the job, and the country, the so-called lender, had another, and this was Clausi de Lehmann, another.
But that had to wait until the elections, and after changing the government,
He is the candidate.
So he wasn't affected by the results of the election?
He was not?
No, no, no.
He was chosen, I think, two weeks ago as president, and I think he will start his new job in January or February.
I'll have to send him.
We had a pretty nice correspondence, and I had a very nice interview with him when I was in Germany.
This is very interesting.
I like the way he did the division.
In Leipzig, they are concentrating on preservation, and they are dividing up responsibilities a little bit, instead of working in competition with each other.
That was my sense of how they were doing things.
Yes, I have only a small insight in the institution, but I think
I think he has made his politics dealing with Leipzig and Frankfurt that they should do nothing in another way but they should give up nothing.
They should continue all things they have done but no one could say you are doing the same thing at Frankfurt and at Leipzig.
It was a very great success, but nobody could say they had to do double things at Leipzig and at Frankfurt.
They have divided their work in a very clear sense, and they had no problems I think with the jobs and so on, and all people I think are
Mostly content.
Mostly.
I didn't sense any disquietude.
Maybe a little bit in Leipzig, but people who were happier under the GDPR.
I was surprised to see that.
I think there was also a problem with the money, because the jobs are not paid to the same level.
And the former federal public people,
I'm working in the libraries and other institutions.
The civil service gets twenty percent more.
I think in perhaps five or six years they're all getting the same money, but today there are differences.
You know Michael Norman, the fellow who left Henry Holt?
That's my publisher, Holt.
He was the head of the publishing house that I went back to Germany.
I just point that out.
So I was following his fortunes here in a curious situation.
Well, this is fascinating.
It is interesting that Germany never did have a national library prior to 1912.
I mean, this is a country with such a profoundly
profound book culture.
Yes, I think the reason is the history of Germany.
Germany was unificated by the Chancellor Bismarck in 1871, politically unificated, but not in a cultural sense.
Already, already after this unification.
Now what year was that again, I'm sorry?
What year was that again?
This was in 1871.
The Chancellor of Bismarck, right, the unification of the German country to one government.
But in the cultural thinking and cultural sense, the former countries remained.
They also, the countries, had ever a great interest not to give up their own possibilities to a central government.
And today, I think it would be impossible to found
national libraries for the older old times the state of Bavaria the state of Baden-Württemberg
It's like Italy, really, in many respects.
You have six national libraries.
You have the Marziana, Naples, Venice, Milan, and the Marziana is strictly Venice.
I mean, that's Venetian history, and you really only have two depository libraries in Italy, but it's the same kind of situation.
Italy wasn't unified until 1876.
Yes, in Germany we have the Deutsche Bibliothek, the depository library for the whole country.
And then I think each country has his own depository library.
Each country of Germany?
Each country of Germany.
Lower Saxony... So we still call them countries?
Yes, Germany has 15 countries.
They're called countries?
Countries, Linda.
country, not regions, lander countries.
How do you spell lander?
L-A with two points.
L-A-E, I think, right?
L-A-E-N-D-E-R.
Because they're still called countries.
There are 15 of them.
15, yes, 15.
And I think most of them have so-called
and national libraries of their countries.
And these libraries are depositary libraries.
For that region?
For the region, for this country, yes.
And all publishers have to give one issue of a book to this Landespiritique, to this national library of the country, and the other one to Frankfurt.
So we have two.
So how do you...
evaluate, how do you see the state of book culture in Germany today?
And that's a very wide-ranging phrase.
I don't even know if you subscribe to it.
I can say I'm not afraid.
I'm not afraid about the future of the book culture in Germany.
I think every year in October at the Frankfurt Book Fair you can see
70,000 new books, 70,000, 70,000 new books, or perhaps 80,000 new books, and there are also some people who call every year, this is the end of the book.
I don't think so.
All publishers are making a lot of books, and are making a lot of CD-ROMs, and digitalization, and so on.
We have a very different
different scene of media, like here in your country too.
I don't think that the books will lose their part in the scene.
Tell me about yourself.
Are you a librarian or are you a scholar?
A little bit about your background, how you come to be the person you are.
I've studied history, literature, and philosophy.
I've made my incriminations and my philosophy doctor.
I would prefer to make an academic career, but there was no job, no possibility, and therefore I had to look for another job.
And I quickly mentioned to work in a library, and this is a very little way to go there.
In Germany, the academic librarians have to make an education after finishing their studies for two years.
One year they work practically in the library, and the second year they have to go to an education institution for librarianship.
I've been at Cologne.
here as one of the institutions, and then you have to make the second examination, and then you can try to get a job.
I'd love to come visit your library sometime.
I'm going to give you my card.
Oh, thank you very much.
That's my email address there, too.
Maybe we can correspond by email.
Oh, excellent.
Yes, Dr. Arnold, yes.
That's wonderful.
How long are you here for in the States?
Here?
Yes, I'm here only for the exhibition.
I've come last Saturday and I'll go back tomorrow.
Oh, I'm glad we were able to.
I mean, I would have, I was telling Steve, this is a trip I would have made for this interview, you know, but now I can go home and transcribe this and now
think of more questions to ask you.
Yes, I think you should perhaps read all these small books.
I think the second part is English.
You can write your question by email.
Exactly.
And this is your library?
The future.
Oh, that's the future.
Yes, we have some old buildings.
And we have one old building which must be rebuilt.
It's an old corn house.
corners of the second half of the Augustine Hall, the old corners of the second half of the seventeenth century, and we would like to re-build this house for our library in the future.
So would you describe this, and I hate to ask a silly question about it, but is this a unique library in your view, or is it part of a larger system?
It's not a unique library in the combination of old printed books and modern scholarly books.
This is the typical library type in Germany and in France and in England and so on.
It's still a unique library in the combination of being a library and being a scholarly institution.
The library has the possibilities to give fellowships
and to organize meetings for other people, for academic people and universities and so on.
I think you hear some
research libraries would do this in a lot of years.
Something like this.
Like the Morgan and the Hunter.
The Morgan and the Hunter.
I apologize for Shakespeare.
We know the colleagues there.
But this is in Germany still a Jungunig type.
Perhaps in the next years also other libraries like the Herzogin Anna Amalia Library at Weimar will also perhaps have the possibility
they are going in this direction.
But I don't think they will be successful to get to this aim.
But in this sense, Wolpert is a unique library in Germany.
You know, I read a lot of magazine articles about libraries, too.
It sounds like yours would be a perfect candidate for one of my stories.
Yes.
We're proud of it.
I think I'd really like to
I had a question.
Are you familiar with the bookseller Heriber Tentrit?
Tentrit is one of our... I had to go to him last year.
I went to visit him in Switzerland, as a matter of fact.
I think we buy some books of the 17th century by him, but... He deals, basically, with very wealthy... He deals, basically, with very wealthy and so on, and his prices, his level is very high.
He told me, basically, as business...
He deals basically with about 25 people in the world.
And he said his gross is $50 million a year.
I've never heard of a bookseller doing that kind of business.
It's amazing.
I think his main partners are private collectors.
I think so.
He has a lot of money.
He told me that last year when I was there he had a bad year because three of his collectors
had various problems.
One had problems with the law.
I mean, income taxes.
Another one died, I think.
That's a real problem.
But just two or three collectors can really make a very significant influence.
It'll be a very interesting story.
I'm also very interested in the whole concept of the scholar-bookseller.
I mean, he really is quite an interest.
He writes all of his catalogs.
He seems to really know his... And like yourself, he studied to be a university professor.
Yeah.
Teter makes very, very, very good catalogs, catalogs of a very high level in bibliographic sense and so on.
And I think he invested a lot of money in these catalogs.
And we have in Germany, for some years, some other antiquarian antiquarians, which also try to make their deals of a very financial, very high level.
Starting with, I think, about 10,000, 15,000 DMs and going higher.
And not to deal with the... Because Germany lost so many of its booksellers during the war.
A lot of the Jewish booksellers who came here... You know, Stephen, he comes back to Germany, to Leipzig book fair, and brings him, and he and his friends, other friends, he come for them, they bring... I introduced those two fellows, by the way, who came... They bring these books back to Germany.
The last year, when they were for the first time in Leipzig.
That's very interesting to me.
They had amazing, a lot of books of the 16th and 17th century, and I asked them about these books.
And yes, these are the books of the collections of former Jewish booksellers, people of Germany who were exiled to study.
And their children are no longer interested in these books.
They cannot read these books.
They're interested.
And then, yet, now they come back.
They're starting to come back.
Well, I'm writing about that.
You see, it is very interesting that the booksellers who left, who came here to New York or went to Canada, went to South America.
I interviewed Nico Israel in Holland.
Of course, he didn't leave.
But these were, they knew what the books were.
And, of course, right after the war, people were in desperate need of money.
These books left Germany, and now you say they're coming back?
They're coming back.
In volume, or little by little, or...?
I don't know.
I asked them, and one of the entrepreneurs said, he thinks that this process could endure for about ten years or so.
Are you impressed by the quality of the books?
Very, very, very, in very good condition.
And how about the content and the titles?
Yes, I think most of them were very interesting.
Stephen told me yesterday that one of his colleagues had made a very good deal in Leipzig.
He has sold books for, what did he say, $150,000.
That's the fellow I introduced to him.
Yes.
I introduced those to him.
I'm on a radio program with this other guy.
And he called me and he said, gee, I've got this German library.
What should I do with it?
I said, well, let me put you in touch with somebody because I knew Steve and I were talking.
Yes, I think that Leipzig is very interested in these antiquarian books because this is the only chance for the Leipzig Fair against Frankfurt.
This is a very, I think, a real chance to get a part of this market
if they specialize in two indigenous books.
And do you think this is an attitude throughout Germany, that Germany is interested in bringing these books back to Germany?
Oh yes.
It is part of the word they use in France, part of the national patrimony.
There's no question about that.
And what specifically are you looking for?
Books in your century, in your 17th century era?
Yes, if we find books in our century, we try to get them.
There are sometimes problems when the prices are too high, but we can also deal with the antiquarians.
I think we have got for the last years most of the books we would like to have.
in our library.
Fortunately, books of the 17th century are still not too high-level priced.
Really?
I think so, yeah.
They're not too high-priced.
They're accessible.
You cannot compare the prices of books of the 17th century with books of the 16th century.
Oh, and the Incunible, of course.
Books of the 16th century are, I think,
at least, double or third times priced like the books of the 17th century.
The 17th is still accessible.
Accessible.
A lot of small, very small books survive.
You can get for 1,000 or 2,000 DM a lot of books survive, but you can't get any book of the 16th century
for 1,000 DM.
Perhaps if it is destroyed, then it will be possible.
By the way, I know you probably want to get downstairs pretty soon, but were there a lot of books destroyed in the war?
World War II, were there a lot of books and libraries destroyed in the war?
What was the extent of war damage?
Professor Dieter Lehmann
said to me, when I was in Leipzig, he said, well, we had a Gutenberg Bible here, it's still in Russia, you know, and we would like some point to get those back.
I think we have learned during the last nine years that I think most of the books haven't been destroyed by the war.
Why not?
They have been stolen after the war.
That's right.
When I was at Mount Athos, in this one library, there was a beautiful geography.
You know, ancient.
And very cleanly cut out of that were the maps of England and Ireland.
You know, some Englishman came through and cut it out, and it's in the British line for me.
And you'd think they would return that to the book.
You know, they won't do that.
This is very good.
There should be a few books that I could consult.
I mean, I do a lot of reading at Harvard, so there should be some books on... Do you think that there is a biography on this gentleman that might be useful for background information for me?
But I'll send you an email.
Yes, okay.
I think you probably want to get downstairs.
Exhibition.
I think we spent two years for working about this with the roller club here.
Yes, it's a real experiment for us.
It's the first time this way.
And what's the point of it?
because it's a good idea to have exhibitions outside the country.
We think that globalization is not only an economic problem, also a cultural problem.
Yes, I think so.
And we wanted to take this chance to introduce us here to the States with such an exhibition.
The other point of view is the support of the
Society of the Friends here in the U.S.
States.
So is this basically a first for the library?
Have you done this kind of thing before?
Elsewhere?
We have made a lot of exhibitions, but it's the first time that we made such a great exhibition with our main treasures outside Germany.
Are you anxious?
Not really.
Not really anxious, but I can say you are the
The insurance value is 50 million German Mark.
Therefore, you see there are treasures.
The value is 50 million German Mark for insurance.
Not just for the materials here, for the whole collection.
No, no, no, for this year, for this year.
For this year?
50 million German D Mark, yes.
Yes, and therefore, I'd say you can see the terms here.
I can't wait.
Without one manuscript, the so-called Evangelia of Duke Henry the Lion, this isn't possible to bring out of our country.
It's a national cultural heritage in which must have been...
impose the same kind of restrictions on the export of national treasures the way France does, for instance, in England now.
Yes, I think so.
And this is more recent, of course, before you could, obviously, some of these things could leave the country.
Now that's impossible, right?
All countries have so-called lists of national heritages, of martial heritages, and all things, books or pictures or other things you can imagine which are listed there cannot be
brought out of the country.
And the Evangelia of Henry the Lion is on this list.
It's impossible.
I can't wait to get out of it.
You can only come to Boston.
I think I've tried to explain it in a very short way.
It's starting two cases of the original conviction of the Duke Library and his own first catalogs, you can see here.
and then his first alphabetic catalogue, this is not the real catalogue, this real catalogue was founded at first into disciplines, and then into the accession, built up in the accession of the books, and to find his own books again, the Duke
has to start as a short, as well as a catalogue that you can see here.
Raphael Lucelius, Maratus de Lucinga, Anton Lucius, Lucenius, Lopanus, and so on.
There's only the nine, and then the shelf marks.
Is this in his hand, by the way?
This is in his hand.
This is the old room, the old room, the castle, and the library was built up.
You can see the Duke.
Where is he?
Standing there.
That's wonderful.
This is August, different stages of his life.
He is a young man, in this way to begin a time.
I told you, this is a book about the chest.
I think at the right hand, he is sitting there.
That is he, as a young man, I think.
Another interest was the cryptography of Gehypschrift.
He developed a different system of cryptography.
He has written a book about this, his manuscript for this book.
You know, one thing I was going to ask upstairs, we were talking about how the Ambrosiana was founded by Cardinal Borromeo as an expression of the Counter-Reformation.
Do you think this library was established as an expression for
The foundation of the library in the 16th century, this is in the context of the Reformation, I'm very sure.
No question about this.
No question, but August was a refounder in the century.
He's also, this is a library which is oriented in the Protestantic and Protestantic.
But he was very often, he was very open for all directions.
He didn't have a closed mind, in a way.
Yes, the beginning of the Spanish scripts, medieval manuscripts from France and Germany, the Spanish scripts from early medieval times.
You see, these dates are almost exactly the same dates when Borromeo was establishing the Ambrosiana.
It was like 1609, 16, right around there.
So you almost have the sense that you have these libraries going up in opposition to each other.
Maybe I'm overreaching on this, I don't know.
You can see one of our famous manuscripts from the ... from the ... And there's a very, very slight binding of ... And this is, I think, really a unique ...
type of manuscripts, the so-called Tyronian notes.
Wow.
That's a thousand years ago.
The highest, the greatest present of these works are the so-called Jackson Speeder.
This is the manuscript of the High Middle Times of the Rite spoken in the country.
The great value comes from the
Congratulations on the exhibition.
It's wonderful.
Thank you.
We're having a little interview.
He's giving me a... Have you been in the... It's 14th century.
So he was a bibliophile.
He was also collecting for beauty and for rarity.
That's a Wycliffe library.
Wow.
That is unbelievable.
You know the medieval poems?
This is unbelievable.
Do we know who the artists are of these?
Never do, do we?
That is quite remarkable.
Early modern times, 16th century and so on.
Tournament books, I believe.
These pictures are very colored and so on.
Are these printed books?
Yes.
Printed books.
But they're hand-colored pictures.
In the autumn of August, in the autumn of the library in Latin, the census, census, everybody who is commissioned to the library and hearing who can use the books.
should all the books get back and should not steal.
And it's dated 1636.
Yes.
Because these books should be useful for other ones too, and not only for a single person to take back.
And this was brought over for this exhibition as well.
This must have been quite a job, putting all this material together.
Yes.
I told you he was very interested in theology and he also tried to make a new translation of the Bible because it was not contained with Martin Luther's works.
He was not content with Martin Luther's works.
He tried really to make a new translation but this was in his older times and he died about this work.
So these are all his annotations?
That's okay.
This is the beginning of the new translation.
And he was attempting it himself?
Yes, I think.
But he found it himself.
This is the new August.
It's the symbol of Augusta.
I'm surprised that there isn't a really... It feels like he really deserves an important biography.
This is Martin Luther.
1522, very famous.
Excellent.
And how many items all together in the exhibition?
Fifty-eight.
Yes, this is one of the great strikers, Nicolaus Deutonicus.
And whose annotations are these?
Do we know?
Yes.
This is the text of the author, Nicholas Copernicus.
Really?
Wow.
I'm very interested in Owen Gingrich, who went around the world to handle every person's edition of Copernicus.
That's why I was curious.
This is one of our great, a lot of astrolabias.
But this one is
in a very, very high standard.
Most of them are destroyed because I think children turn around.
A very early interactive book, we might say.
books, nice, nice, nice to see here, I think.
I think there is also a chronicle box of the 17th, 17th century, and we have also
collected some books because of their standard binding.
You can see the binding is standing here.
Franz Laurentier was the court cook of one of the dukes of Hans-Holfe Bartol in the 16th century.
He couldn't read and he couldn't write, and he dictated to a writer, and his writer
And that's his recipes there.
Yes, you know, New York arteries have a great tradition of
The reception of books of Rome and Greece, they have a great path to discovery.
And this is also books for them, not only the virtual, but human.
It's clear that human has this must be seen here.
And these books are also tonight, all of their illustrations.
And he acquired all of these.
These were all acquired during his lifetime, do you believe?
That's amazing.
Let's see.
Yes.
One of the most famous, can I hear?
Francesca Colonna.
I think that's one of the... It's an album, of course.
Yeah, yes.
One of the nice, nice, interesting of the late 15th century.
Do you have any favorites?
Yes, I think I have something that works.
So, this book here, one of the books, the story of the Emperor Maximilian I, written by himself, and I think the illustrations are very, very fine because of the comments used here.
The entry of Emperor Charles.
Symbol on the end.
Remarkable.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
This is great.